Dbt integration tutorial update - Cosmos tutorial (#2058)
astronomer/docs: learn/airflow-dbt.md

```sql
CREATE DATABASE energy_db;
\connect energy_db
CREATE SCHEMA energy_schema;
```

## Step 4: Create your dbt models

In this tutorial we will use an example dbt job that consists of two dbt models. The first model called `select_country` will select the data for a specific country. The second model `create_pct` will use the table created by the first model to calculate the percentage of renewable and solar energy capacity in the country you selected.

1. Create a folder called `dbt` in your Astro project. The Astronomer dbt provider will by default look for dbt projects in a `dbt` directory inside of your `AIRFLOW_HOME` directory, this behavior can be overridden on the `DbtDAG` or `DbtTaskGroup` level by setting `dbt_root_path`.

2. In the `dbt` directory, create a sub-directory called `my_energy_project`. This folder will contain all files related to the dbt project `my_energy_project`.

> 3. Within the `my_energy_project` directory create a YAML file called `dbt-project.yml`. Use the following YAML configuration to create a dbt project called `my_energy_project` which has its models in the `models` sub-directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Within the `my_energy_project` directory, create a YAML file called `dbt-project.yml`. Use the following YAML configuration to create a dbt project called `my_energy_project` which has its models in the `models` sub-directory.
```

    vars:
      country_code: "FR"
    ```

4. Within `my_energy_project` create a sub-directory called `models`.

5. Create a SQL file named `select_country.sql` within the `models` folder. Copy the following dbt model into the file. The country for which data will be selected is retrieved from a variable called `country_code` which we'll inject from the Airflow DAG.:

    ```sql
    select 
        "YEAR", "COUNTRY", "SOLAR_CAPACITY", "TOTAL_CAPACITY", "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY"
    from energy_db.energy_schema.energy
    where "COUNTRY" = '{{ var("country_code") }}'
    ```

6. Create a SQL file named `create_pct.sql` within the `models` folder. Copy the following dbt model into the file:

    ```sql
    select 
        "YEAR", "COUNTRY", "SOLAR_CAPACITY", "TOTAL_CAPACITY", "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY",
        "SOLAR_CAPACITY" / "TOTAL_CAPACITY" AS "SOLAR_PCT",
        "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY" / "TOTAL_CAPACITY" AS "RENEWABLES_PCT"
    from {{ ref('select_country') }}
    where "TOTAL_CAPACITY" is not NULL
    ```

:::info

If you are using a different data warehouse than Postgres you might need to adapt the SQL dialect in the dbt models.

:::

> 7. In order for changes in the local `dbt` folder to be synchronized with the `dbt` folder in the Airflow components Docker containers, the folder needs to be mounted. Create a file called `docker-compose.override.yml` in your Astro project folder and copy the following contents into the file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7.  Create a file called `docker-compose.override.yml` in your Astro project folder and copy the following contents into the file:
```

    ```yaml
    version: "3.1"
    services:
      scheduler:
        volumes:
          - ./dbt:/usr/local/airflow/dbt
      webserver:
        volumes:
          - ./dbt:/usr/local/airflow/dbt
      triggerer:
        volumes:
          - ./dbt:/usr/local/airflow/dbt

>     ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ```
This mounts your `dbt` folder to the Docker containers running Airflow when you start up your project.

```

You should now have the following structure within your Astro project:

```text
.
└── dags
├── dbt
│   └── my_energy_project
│      ├── dbt_project.yml
│      └── models
│          ├── select_country.sql
│          └── create_pct.sql
├── include
│   └── subset_energy_capacity.csv
└── docker-compose.override.yml
```

## Step 5: Configure a data warehouse connection

1. Start Airflow by running `astro dev start`.

2. In the Airflow UI, go to **Admin** -> **Connections** and click **+**. 

> 3. Create a new connection named `db_conn`. Select the connection type and supplied parameters based on which data warehouse you are using, note that for some tools you might need to add the [relevant provider package](https://registry.astronomer.io/) to `requirements.txt` and restart Airflow, in order to have the correct connection type. For a Postgres connection, enter the following information:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Create a new connection named `db_conn`. Select the connection type and supplied parameters based on the data warehouse you are using. For a Postgres connection, enter the following information:
```

Let's put this "note that for some tools you might need to add the [relevant provider package](https://registry.astronomer.io/) to `requirements.txt` and restart Airflow, in order to have the correct connection type" as a note at the bottom of the section.

    - Connection ID: `db_conn`.
    - Connection Type: `Postgres`.

>     - Host: your Postgres host address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Host: Your Postgres host address.
```

    - Schema: Your Postgres database (`energy_db`). 
    - Login: Your Postgres login username.
    - Password: Your Postgres password.
    - Port: your Postgres port.

## Step 6: Write a dbt DAG

The DAG used in this tutorial shows how you can use the Astronomer dbt provider to create tasks from existing dbt models and have those task be embedded within other actions in your data ecosystem.

1. In your `dags` folder, create a file called `my_energy_dag`.

2. Copy and paste the following DAG code into the file:

    <CodeBlock language="python">{cosmos_dag}</CodeBlock>

>     This DAG consists of 2 tasks defined with the Astro Python SDK and one `DbtTaskGroup`:

Reviewer: I think it's worth adding a few more call outs in this section about the work the astro dbt provider is doing automatically. Doesn't have to be a ton of text since we also mention it in the intro, but I kind of lost that thread reading through it and it's a really cool feature that I think we want to make sure people grasp.

    - the `log_data_analysis` task uses the [Astro Python SDK dataframe operator](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/astro/sql/operators/dataframe.html) to use pandas to run an analysis on the final table created through the dbt models and logs the results.

3. Determine for which country your DAG will analyze data by specifying your desired `country_code` in the `dbt_args` parameter of the DbtTaskGroup. The underlying data contains energy capacity information for several European countries, you can for example use `GB` to select data from Great Britain or `DE` for data from Germany.

4. Run the DAG manually by clicking on the play button and view the DAG in the graph view (double click on the task groups in order to expand them). 

    ![Cosmos DAG graph view](/img/guides/cosmos_dag_graph_view.png)

5. Navigate to the logs of the `log_data_analysis` task to see the proportional solar and renewable energy capacity development in the country you selected.

    ![Energy Analysis logs](/img/guides/cosmos_energy_analysis_logs.png)

:::info

> To create a full DAG from your dbt models use the `DbtDag` class, as shown in the [Astronomer dbt provider documentation](https://astronomer.github.io/astronomer-cosmos/dbt/usage.html#full-dag).

Reviewer: I'm not totally clear on what this comment means. Didn't we just create a full DAG from dbt models?

- Low observability into what execution state the project is in.
- Failures are absolute and require the whole `dbt` group of models to be run again, which can be costly.

:::info

The code for this example can be found on [the Astronomer Registry](https://registry.astronomer.io/dags/dbt-basic).

:::

### Using a manifest file

An alternative way to gain more visibility into the steps dbt is running in each task if you are unable to use the Astronomer dbt provider, is to use a dbt generated `manifest.json` file. This file is generated in the target directory of your `dbt` project and contains its full representation. For more information on this file, see the [dbt documentation](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-artifacts/).

You can learn more about a manifest based dbt and Airflow project structure, view example code and read about the `DbtDagParser` in a 3-part blog post series on [Building a Scalable Analytics Architecture With Airflow and dbt](https://www.astronomer.io/blog/airflow-dbt-1/) ([Part 2](https://www.astronomer.io/blog/airflow-dbt-2/), [Part 3](https://www.astronomer.io/blog/airflow-dbt-3/)). 

## Conclusion

> Congratulations! You've run a DAG using the Astronomer dbt provider to automatically create tasks from dbt models. The Astronomer dbt provider is under active development, learn more about up to date additional features in the [Astronomer dbt provider documentation](https://astronomer.github.io/astronomer-cosmos/index.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Congratulations! You've run a DAG using the Astronomer dbt provider to automatically create tasks from dbt models. The Astronomer dbt provider is under active development. You can learn more about it in the [Astronomer dbt provider documentation](https://astronomer.github.io/astronomer-cosmos/index.html).
```

</head>

import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import cosmos_dag from '!!raw-loader!../code-samples/dags/airflow-dbt/cosmos_dag.py';
import airflow_dbt_bashoperator from '!!raw-loader!../code-samples/dags/airflow-dbt/airflow_dbt_bashoperator.py';
import airflow_dbt_model from '!!raw-loader!../code-samples/dags/airflow-dbt/airflow_dbt_model.py';

[dbt Core](https://docs.getdbt.com/) is an open-source library for analytics engineering that helps users build interdependent SQL models for in-warehouse data transformation, using ephemeral compute of data warehouses. 

The [Astro dbt provider](https://astronomer.github.io/astronomer-cosmos/), also known as Cosmos, allows you to automatically create Airflow tasks from dbt models, seamlessly integrating dbt jobs into your Airflow orchestration environment. Running dbt Core with Airflow allows you implement event-based scheduling of dbt and integrate with other tools in your data ecosystem, while maintaining full observability of dbt model runs from the Airflow UI.

:::info

For a tutorial on how to use dbt Cloud with Airflow see [Orchestrate dbt Cloud with Airflow](airflow-dbt-cloud.md).

:::

:::info

> The DAG used in this tutorial is accessible in the Astronomer registry ADD LINK LATER and the full Astro project can be cloned from [this repository](https://github.com/astronomer/astro-dbt-provider-tutorial-example). 

Reviewer 2: leaving a comment here to track the registry link action item

Author: This is the PR to wait for: https://github.com/astronomer/daedalus/pull/319 :)

Author: Note: the PR will be held until TaskGroups can be displayed in the registry (it will be the guinea pig for that functionality) so I am taking out that sentence for the first merge of this tutorial and add the registry link back in once the DAGs are available there :)

  <meta name="og:description" content="Learn how to use the  Astro dbt provider to orchestrate dbt Core jobs with Airflow." />
</head>

import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import cosmos_dag from '!!raw-loader!../code-samples/dags/airflow-dbt/cosmos_dag.py';
import airflow_dbt_bashoperator from '!!raw-loader!../code-samples/dags/airflow-dbt/airflow_dbt_bashoperator.py';
import airflow_dbt_model from '!!raw-loader!../code-samples/dags/airflow-dbt/airflow_dbt_model.py';

[dbt Core](https://docs.getdbt.com/) is an open-source library for analytics engineering that helps users build interdependent SQL models for in-warehouse data transformation, using ephemeral compute of data warehouses. 

The [Astro dbt provider](https://astronomer.github.io/astronomer-cosmos/), also known as Cosmos, allows you to automatically create Airflow tasks from dbt models, seamlessly integrating dbt jobs into your Airflow orchestration environment. Running dbt Core with Airflow allows you implement event-based scheduling of dbt and integrate with other tools in your data ecosystem, while maintaining full observability of dbt model runs from the Airflow UI.

> :::info
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

For a tutorial on how to use dbt Cloud with Airflow see [Orchestrate dbt Cloud with Airflow](airflow-dbt-cloud.md).

> :::
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

    where "TOTAL_CAPACITY" is not NULL
    ```

:::info

If you are using a different data warehouse than Postgres you might need to adapt the SQL dialect in the dbt models.

:::

You should now have the following structure within your Astro project:

```text
.
└── dags
│   └── dbt
│       └── my_energy_project
│          ├── dbt_project.yml
│          └── models
│              ├── select_country.sql
│              └── create_pct.sql
└── include
    └── subset_energy_capacity.csv
```

## Step 5: Configure a data warehouse connection

1. Start Airflow by running `astro dev start`.

2. In the Airflow UI, go to **Admin** -> **Connections** and click **+**. 

3. Create a new connection named `db_conn`. Select the connection type and supplied parameters based on the data warehouse you are using. For a Postgres connection, enter the following information:

    - **Connection ID**: `db_conn`.
    - **Connection Type**: `Postgres`.
    - **Host**: Your Postgres host address.
    - **Schema**: Your Postgres database (`energy_db`). 
    - **Login**: Your Postgres login username.
    - **Password**: Your Postgres password.
    - **Port**: Your Postgres port.

:::info

> If a connection type for your database isn't available, you might need to add the [relevant provider package](https://registry.astronomer.io/) to `requirements.txt` and run `astro dev restart` to have the connection type available.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If a connection type for your database isn't available, you might need to make it available by adding the [relevant provider package](https://registry.astronomer.io/) to `requirements.txt` and running `astro dev restart`.
```

    ![Energy Analysis logs](/img/guides/cosmos_energy_analysis_logs.png)

:::info

The DbtTaskGroup class populates an Airflow task group with Airflow tasks created from dbt models inside of a normal DAG. To directly define a full DAG containing only dbt models use the `DbtDag` class, as shown in the [Astro dbt provider documentation](https://astronomer.github.io/astronomer-cosmos/dbt/usage.html#full-dag).

:::

## Alternative ways to run dbt Core with Airflow

While using the Astro dbt provider is recommended, there are several other ways to run dbt Core with Airflow.

### Using the BashOperator

You can use the [BashOperator](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/bashoperator) to execute specific dbt commands. It's recommended to run `dbt-core` and the dbt adapter for your database in a virtual environment because there often are dependency conflicts between dbt and other packages.

The DAG below uses the BashOperator to activate the virtual environment and execute `dbt_run` for a dbt project.

<CodeBlock language="python">{airflow_dbt_bashoperator}</CodeBlock>

> Using the `BashOperator` to run `dbt run` and other dbt commands be useful during development. However, running dbt at the project level has a couple of issues:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Using the `BashOperator` to run `dbt run` and other dbt commands can be useful during development. However, running dbt at the project level has a couple of issues:
```

- There is low observability into what execution state the project is in.
- Failures are absolute and require all models in a project to be run again, which can be costly.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

### Using a manifest file

Using a dbt-generated `manifest.json` file gives you more visibility into the steps dbt is running in each task. This file is generated in the target directory of your `dbt` project and contains its full representation. For more information on this file, see the [dbt documentation](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-artifacts/).

> You can learn more about a manifest-based dbt and Airflow project structure, view example code, and read about the `DbtDagParser` in a 3-part blog post series on [Building a Scalable Analytics Architecture With Airflow and dbt](https://www.astronomer.io/blog/airflow-dbt-1/) ([Part 2](https://www.astronomer.io/blog/airflow-dbt-2/), [Part 3](https://www.astronomer.io/blog/airflow-dbt-3/)). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can learn more about a manifest-based dbt and Airflow project structure, view example code, and read about the `DbtDagParser` in a 3-part blog post series on [Building a Scalable Analytics Architecture With Airflow and dbt](https://www.astronomer.io/blog/airflow-dbt-1/). 
```
If they don't know about it yet, I think it's good to just link part 1 and not overwhelm with choice.

Author: That makes sense yeah :)

- Airflow operators. See [Operators 101](what-is-an-operator.md).
- Airflow task groups. See [Airflow task groups](task-groups.md).

## Prerequisites

- The [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli).
- Access to a data warehouse supported by dbt Core. View the [dbt documentation](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/supported-data-platforms) for an up-to-date list of adapters. This tutorial uses a local [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/) database.

You do not need to have dbt Core installed locally in order to complete this tutorial.

## Step 1: Configure your Astro project

An Astro project contains all of the files you need to run Airflow locally.

1. Create a new Astro project:

    ```sh
    $ mkdir astro-dbt-core-tutorial && cd astro-dbt-core-tutorial
    $ astro dev init
    ```

2. Open the `Dockerfile` in your Airflow project directory and add the following lines at the end of the file:

    ```text
    # install dbt into a virtual environment
    # replace dbt-postgres with the adapter you need
    RUN python -m venv dbt_venv && source dbt_venv/bin/activate && \

>     pip install --no-cache-dir dbt-core dbt-postgres && deactivate

Reviewer 4: `dbt-postgres` will actually install `dbt-core` as a dependency, so you don't need to explicitly list it here! Instead you could just do this:

```Dockerfile
RUN python -m venv dbt_venv && source dbt_venv/bin/activate && \
pip install --no-cache-dir dbt-postgres && deactivate
```

Author: Thank you! That makes a lot of sense 😄  Just to double check: I assume this is true for all (official) dbt adapters?

---
title: "Orchestrate dbt Core jobs with the Astro dbt provider"
sidebar_label: "dbt Core"
id: airflow-dbt
sidebar_custom_props: { icon: 'img/integrations/dbt.png' }
---

<head>
  <meta name="description" content="Learn how to use the Astro dbt provider to orchestrate dbt Core jobs with Airflow." />
  <meta name="og:description" content="Learn how to use the  Astro dbt provider to orchestrate dbt Core jobs with Airflow." />
</head>

import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import cosmos_dag from '!!raw-loader!../code-samples/dags/airflow-dbt/cosmos_dag.py';
import airflow_dbt_bashoperator from '!!raw-loader!../code-samples/dags/airflow-dbt/airflow_dbt_bashoperator.py';
import airflow_dbt_model from '!!raw-loader!../code-samples/dags/airflow-dbt/airflow_dbt_model.py';

[dbt Core](https://docs.getdbt.com/) is an open-source library for analytics engineering that helps users build interdependent SQL models for in-warehouse data transformation, using ephemeral compute of data warehouses. 

> The [Astro dbt provider](https://astronomer.github.io/astronomer-cosmos/), also known as Cosmos, allows you to automatically create Airflow tasks from dbt models, seamlessly integrating dbt jobs into your Airflow orchestration environment. Running dbt Core with Airflow allows you implement event-based scheduling of dbt and integrate with other tools in your data ecosystem, while maintaining full observability of dbt model runs from the Airflow UI.

Reviewer 3: Surprised that we're referring to this as the "Astro dbt provider"  instead of Cosmos throughout the doc. I thought we were trying to socialize the Cosmos name?

Author: Yeah, I think the idea is that there will be several Astro providers? I also only learned about the renaming recently.

Reviewer 3: Let's double check on this in a few weeks once the dust settles on various renamings

    ```sql
    select 
        "YEAR", "COUNTRY", "SOLAR_CAPACITY", "TOTAL_CAPACITY", "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY",
        "SOLAR_CAPACITY" / "TOTAL_CAPACITY" AS "SOLAR_PCT",
        "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY" / "TOTAL_CAPACITY" AS "RENEWABLES_PCT"
    from {{ ref('select_country') }}
    where "TOTAL_CAPACITY" is not NULL
    ```

:::info

If you are using a different data warehouse than Postgres you might need to adapt the SQL dialect in the dbt models.

:::

You should now have the following structure within your Astro project:

```text
.
└── dags
│   └── dbt
│       └── my_energy_project
│          ├── dbt_project.yml
│          └── models
│              ├── select_country.sql
│              └── create_pct.sql
└── include
    └── subset_energy_capacity.csv
```

## Step 5: Configure a data warehouse connection

1. Start Airflow by running `astro dev start`.

2. In the Airflow UI, go to **Admin** -> **Connections** and click **+**. 

3. Create a new connection named `db_conn`. Select the connection type and supplied parameters based on the data warehouse you are using. For a Postgres connection, enter the following information:

>     - Connection ID: `db_conn`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - **Connection ID**: `db_conn`.
```
Bold all field names

    - Connection Type: `Postgres`.
    - Host: Your Postgres host address.
    - Schema: Your Postgres database (`energy_db`). 
    - Login: Your Postgres login username.
    - Password: Your Postgres password.
    - Port: Your Postgres port.

:::info

> For some databases you might need to add the [relevant provider package](https://registry.astronomer.io/) to requirements.txt and restart Airflow in order to have the correct connection type available.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If a connection type for your database isn't available, you might need to add the [relevant provider package](https://registry.astronomer.io/) to `requirements.txt` and run `astro dev restart` to have the connection type available.
```

:::

> ## Step 6: Write a dbt DAG

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Step 6: Write your Airflow DAG
```

Author: haha `dbt DAG`, not sure why I wrote that

The DAG used in this tutorial shows how you can use the Astro dbt provider to create tasks from existing dbt models and have those task be embedded within other actions in your data ecosystem.

1. In your `dags` folder, create a file called `my_energy_dag`.

2. Copy and paste the following DAG code into the file:

    <CodeBlock language="python">{cosmos_dag}</CodeBlock>

    This DAG consists of 2 tasks defined with the Astro Python SDK and one `DbtTaskGroup`:

    - The `load_file` task uses the [Astro Python SDK `load file` operator](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/astro/sql/operators/load_file.html) to load the contents of the local CSV file into the data warehouse.
    - The `transform_data` task group is created from the dbt models. Using the models defined in Step 4, the task group will contain two nested task groups with two tasks each, one for `dbt run`, the other for `dbt test`.

>     - The `log_data_analysis` task uses the [Astro Python SDK dataframe operator](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/astro/sql/operators/dataframe.html) to run an analysis on the final table created through the dbt models using `pandas` and to log the results.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - The `log_data_analysis` task uses the [Astro Python SDK dataframe operator](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/astro/sql/operators/dataframe.html) to run an analysis on the final table using `pandas` and logs the results.
```

>     The `DbtTaskGroup` function of the Astro dbt provider package automatically scans the `dbt` folder for dbt projects and creates a task group (`transform_data` in this example) containing Airflow tasks running and testing the project's models. Additionally, the provider can infer the model dependency within the dbt project and will set the Airflow task dependencies accordingly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    The `DbtTaskGroup` function of the Astro dbt provider package automatically scans the `dbt` folder for dbt projects and creates a task group (`transform_data` in this example) containing Airflow tasks for running and testing your dbt models. Additionally, the provider can infer dependencies within the dbt project and will set your Airflow task dependencies accordingly.
```

> 3. (Optional) Choose which country's data to analyze by specifying your desired `country_code` in the `dbt_args` parameter of the DbtTaskGroup. Note that this [dataset](https://github.com/astronomer/learn-tutorials-data/blob/main/subset_energy_capacity.csv) only contains data for several European countries.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. (Optional) Choose which country's data to analyze by specifying your desired `country_code` in the `dbt_args` parameter of the DbtTaskGroup. See the [dataset](https://github.com/astronomer/learn-tutorials-data/blob/main/subset_energy_capacity.csv) for all available country codes.
```

> 4. Run the DAG manually by clicking on the play button and view the DAG in the graph view (double click on the task groups in order to expand them). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Run the DAG manually by clicking the play button and view the DAG in the graph view. Double click the task groups in order to expand them and see all tasks. 
```

    ![Cosmos DAG graph view](/img/guides/cosmos_dag_graph_view.png)

> 5. Navigate to the logs of the `log_data_analysis` task to see the proportional solar and renewable energy capacity development in the country you selected.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
5. Open the logs of the `log_data_analysis` task to see the proportional solar and renewable energy capacity development in the country you selected.
```

    ![Energy Analysis logs](/img/guides/cosmos_energy_analysis_logs.png)

:::info

The DbtTaskGroup class populates an Airflow task group with Airflow tasks created from dbt models inside of a normal DAG. To directly define a full DAG containing only dbt models use the `DbtDag` class, as shown in the [Astro dbt provider documentation](https://astronomer.github.io/astronomer-cosmos/dbt/usage.html#full-dag).

:::

> :::tip
> 
> Learn more about the Astro dbt provider in the [Astro dbt provider documentation](https://astronomer.github.io/astronomer-cosmos/).
> 
> :::

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
Let's link this in the intro, rather than at the end (especially since the note before is also a link to the docs)

## Alternative ways to run dbt Core with Airflow

While using the Astro dbt provider is recommended, there are several other ways to run dbt Core with Airflow.

### Using the BashOperator

> You can use the [BashOperator](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/bashoperator) to execute specific dbt commands. Note that it is recommended to create a virtual environment with `dbt-core` and the dbt adapter for your database installed as there often are package conflicts between dbt and other packages.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can use the [BashOperator](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/apache-airflow/modules/bashoperator) to execute specific dbt commands. It's recommended to run `dbt-core` and the dbt adapter for your database in a virtual environment because there often are dependency conflicts between dbt and other packages.
```
Recommended

The DAG below uses the BashOperator to activate the virtual environment and execute `dbt_run` for a dbt project.

<CodeBlock language="python">{airflow_dbt_bashoperator}</CodeBlock>

> Using the `BashOperator` to run `dbt run` and other dbt commands be useful during development. However, running dbt at the project-level has several issues:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Using the `BashOperator` to run `dbt run` and other dbt commands be useful during development. However, running dbt at the project level has a couple of issues:
```

> - Low observability into what execution state the project is in.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- There is low observability into what execution state the project is in.
```

- Failures are absolute and require all models in a project to be run again, which can be costly.

> Astronomer recommends to use the Astro dbt provider as shown in the tutorial above, whenever possible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 3: Don't think we need to repeat this

### Using a manifest file

> An alternative way to gain more visibility into the steps dbt is running in each task is to use a dbt-generated `manifest.json` file. This file is generated in the target directory of your `dbt` project and contains its full representation. For more information on this file, see the [dbt documentation](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-artifacts/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Using a dbt-generated `manifest.json` file gives you more visibility into the steps dbt is running in each task. This file is generated in the target directory of your `dbt` project and contains its full representation. For more information on this file, see the [dbt documentation](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-artifacts/).
```

---

> title: "Orchestrate dbt Core with the Astronomer dbt provider"

Reviewer: Should this be "dbt Core jobs" here as well, like the cloud one?

sidebar_label: "dbt Core"
id: airflow-dbt
---

<head>
  <meta name="description" content="Learn how to use the Astronomer dbt Provider to orchestrate dbt Core jobs with Airflow." />
  <meta name="og:description" content="Learn how to use the  Astronomer dbt Provider to orchestrate dbt Core jobs with Airflow." />
</head>

import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';
import cosmos_dag from '!!raw-loader!../code-samples/dags/airflow-dbt/cosmos_dag.py';
import airflow_dbt_bashoperator from '!!raw-loader!../code-samples/dags/airflow-dbt/airflow_dbt_bashoperator.py';
import airflow_dbt_model from '!!raw-loader!../code-samples/dags/airflow-dbt/airflow_dbt_model.py';

[dbt Core](https://docs.getdbt.com/) is an open-source library for analytics engineering that helps users build interdependent SQL models for in-warehouse data transformation, using ephemeral compute of data warehouses. 

> The [Astronomer dbt provider](https://astronomer.github.io/astronomer-cosmos/), also known as Cosmos, allows you to automatically create Airflow tasks from dbt models, seamlessly integrating dbt jobs into your Airflow orchestration environment. Running dbt Core with Airflow allows you implement event-based scheduling of dbt and integrate with other tools in your data ecosystem, while maintaining full observability of dbt model runs from the Airflow UI.

Reviewer 2: small nit: can we call this the Astro dbt provider? It's referenced here and a few other places

    AIRFLOW__CORE__ALLOWED_DESERIALIZATION_CLASSES = airflow\.* astro\.*
    ```

## Step 2: Prepare the data

This tutorial uses an Airflow DAG to orchestrate dbt Core jobs that calculate the percentage of solar and renewable energy capacity in different years for a selected country.

1. [Download the CSV file](https://github.com/astronomer/learn-tutorials-data/blob/main/subset_energy_capacity.csv) from GitHub.
2. Save the downloaded CSV file in the `include` directory of your Airflow project.

This tutorial uses a subset of the original data. The full data source provided by Open Power System Data can be found [here](https://doi.org/10.25832/national_generation_capacity/2020-10-01).

## Step 3: Prepare your data warehouse

In your data warehouse, create a new database called `energy_db` with a schema called `energy_schema`. If you are using [`psql`](https://www.postgresguide.com/utilities/psql/) with a Postgres database, use the commands below:

```sql
CREATE DATABASE energy_db;
\connect energy_db
CREATE SCHEMA energy_schema;
```

If you are using a different data warehouse, your commands to create the database and schema may differ.

## Step 4: Create your dbt models

> In this tutorial we will use an example dbt job that consists of two dbt models. The first model, called `select_country`, will select the data for a specific country. The second model, called `create_pct`, will use the table created by the first model to calculate the percentage of renewable and solar energy capacity in the country you selected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial we will use an example dbt job that consists of two dbt models. The first model, called `select_country`, will select the data for a country you select. The second model, called `create_pct`, will use the table created by the first model to calculate the percentage of renewable and solar energy capacity in that country.
```

> 1. Create a folder called `dbt` in your Astro project. The Astronomer dbt provider will by default look for dbt projects in a `dbt` directory inside of your `AIRFLOW_HOME` directory. This behavior can be overridden on the `DbtDAG` or `DbtTaskGroup` level by setting `dbt_root_path`.

Reviewer: The "overriding" comment here is a bit confusing to me. Maybe we can say something like "You can modify the directory that stores the dbt projects for specific DAGs or task groups by setting the `dbt_root_path` param". (or something like that, if my comment isn't accurate)

> 1. Create a folder called `dbt` in your Astro project. The Astronomer dbt provider will by default look for dbt projects in a `dbt` directory inside of your `AIRFLOW_HOME` directory. You can modify the directory in which `DbtDAG` or `DbtTaskGroup` searches for dbt models by providing a different path to the `dbt_root_path` parameter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create a folder called `dbt` in your Astro project. The Astronomer dbt provider will by default look for dbt projects in a `dbt` directory inside of your `AIRFLOW_HOME` directory. You can modify the directory in which `DbtDag` or `DbtTaskGroup` searches for dbt models by providing a different path to the `dbt_root_path` parameter.
```

> 1. Create a folder called `dbt` in your Astro project. The Astronomer dbt provider will by default look for dbt projects in a `dbt` directory inside of your `AIRFLOW_HOME` directory. You can modify the directory in which `DbtDAG` or `DbtTaskGroup` searches for dbt models by providing a different path to the `dbt_root_path` parameter.

Reviewer 2: Can we make a note about putting the `dbt` directory in the `dags` folder? If you do that, you can use DAG-based deploys. See https://github.com/astronomer/cosmos-dev/blob/main/dags/jaffle_shop.py#L27-L28 for an example.

We haven't updated our default path or docs yet (will do that for a 1.0 release) to not break current implementations.

> 2. In the `dbt` directory, create a sub-directory called `my_energy_project`. This folder will contain all files related to the dbt project `my_energy_project`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. In the `dbt` directory, create a sub-directory called `my_energy_project`.
```
Think we can remove the second sentence unless it's conveying dbt-specific information (in which case I would define what a "dbt project" is)

    ```sql
    select 
        "YEAR", "COUNTRY", "SOLAR_CAPACITY", "TOTAL_CAPACITY", "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY"
    from energy_db.energy_schema.energy
    where "COUNTRY" = '{{ var("country_code") }}'
    ```

6. Create a SQL file named `create_pct.sql` within the `models` folder. Copy the following dbt model into the file:

    ```sql
    select 
        "YEAR", "COUNTRY", "SOLAR_CAPACITY", "TOTAL_CAPACITY", "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY",
        "SOLAR_CAPACITY" / "TOTAL_CAPACITY" AS "SOLAR_PCT",
        "RENEWABLES_CAPACITY" / "TOTAL_CAPACITY" AS "RENEWABLES_PCT"
    from {{ ref('select_country') }}
    where "TOTAL_CAPACITY" is not NULL
    ```

:::info

If you are using a different data warehouse than Postgres you might need to adapt the SQL dialect in the dbt models.

:::

7.  Create a file called `docker-compose.override.yml` in your Astro project folder and copy the following contents into the file:

    ```yaml
    version: "3.1"
    services:
      scheduler:
        volumes:
          - ./dbt:/usr/local/airflow/dbt
      webserver:
        volumes:
          - ./dbt:/usr/local/airflow/dbt
      triggerer:
        volumes:

>           - ./dbt:/usr/local/airflow/dbt

Reviewer 2: if you put the dbt directory in the dags directory, you don't need this!

    ```
This mounts your `dbt` folder to the Docker containers running Airflow when you start up your project.

You should now have the following structure within your Astro project:

```text
.
└── dags
├── dbt
│   └── my_energy_project
│      ├── dbt_project.yml
│      └── models
│          ├── select_country.sql
│          └── create_pct.sql
├── include
│   └── subset_energy_capacity.csv
└── docker-compose.override.yml
```

> ## Step 5: Configure a data warehouse connection

Reviewer 2: not necessarily asking for a change here, but should someone use the airflow_settings.yaml file or the airflow UI to create connections locally?

Reviewer: Generally this is user preference. In most tutorials we show using the Airflow UI because we've gotten feedback in the past that a lot of users do it that way. and the more important part is showing _what_ goes in the connection (usually the more confusing part)

1. Start Airflow by running `astro dev start`.

2. In the Airflow UI, go to **Admin** -> **Connections** and click **+**. 

3. Create a new connection named `db_conn`. Select the connection type and supplied parameters based on the data warehouse you are using. For a Postgres connection, enter the following information:

    - Connection ID: `db_conn`.
    - Connection Type: `Postgres`.
    - Host: Your Postgres host address.
    - Schema: Your Postgres database (`energy_db`). 
    - Login: Your Postgres login username.
    - Password: Your Postgres password.
    - Port: Your Postgres port.

:::info

> For some tools you might need to add the [relevant provider package](https://registry.astronomer.io/) to requirements.txt and restart Airflow, in order to have the correct connection type available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For some databases you might need to add the [relevant provider package](https://registry.astronomer.io/) to requirements.txt and restart Airflow in order to have the correct connection type available.
```

:::

## Step 6: Write a dbt DAG

The DAG used in this tutorial shows how you can use the Astronomer dbt provider to create tasks from existing dbt models and have those task be embedded within other actions in your data ecosystem.

1. In your `dags` folder, create a file called `my_energy_dag`.

2. Copy and paste the following DAG code into the file:

>     <CodeBlock language="python">{cosmos_dag}</CodeBlock>

Reviewer 2: Not sure how we generally think about writing DAGs, but IMO a lot of these comments feel unnecessary and the DAG can be shortened quite a bit - examples of code that's self explanatory but still has comments:
```
# import tools from the Astro SDK
from astro import sql as aql
from astro.sql.table import Table, Metadata
from astro.files import File
```

```
# get the airflow.task logger
task_logger = logging.getLogger("airflow.task")
```

```
# set variables
CONNECTION_ID = "db_conn"
DB_NAME = "energy_db"
SCHEMA_NAME = "energy_schema"
CSV_FILEPATH = "include/subset_energy_capacity.csv"
DBT_PROJECT_NAME = "my_energy_project"
```

```
# set dependencies
...
```

Reviewer 2: I do the same but I'm trying to get better about it 🙂

    This DAG consists of 2 tasks defined with the Astro Python SDK and one `DbtTaskGroup`:

>     - the `load_file` task uses the [Astro Python SDK `load file` operator](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/astro/sql/operators/load_file.html) to load the contents of the local CSV file into the data warehouse.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The `load_file` task uses the [Astro Python SDK `load file` operator](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/astro/sql/operators/load_file.html) to load the contents of the local CSV file into the data warehouse.
```

>     - the `transform_data` task group is created from the dbt models. Using the models defined in Step 4, the task group will contain two nested task groups with two tasks each, one for `dbt run`, the other for `dbt test`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The `transform_data` task group is created from the dbt models. Using the models defined in Step 4, the task group will contain two nested task groups with two tasks each, one for `dbt run`, the other for `dbt test`.
```

>     - the `log_data_analysis` task uses the [Astro Python SDK dataframe operator](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/astro/sql/operators/dataframe.html) to use pandas to run an analysis on the final table created through the dbt models and logs the results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The `log_data_analysis` task uses the [Astro Python SDK dataframe operator](https://astro-sdk-python.readthedocs.io/en/stable/astro/sql/operators/dataframe.html) to run an analysis on the final table created through the dbt models using `pandas` and to log the results.
```

>     The `DbtTaskGroup` of the Astronomer dbt provider package automatically scans the `dbt` folder for dbt projects and creates a task group containing one Airflow task for every dbt command run on every model in the project. Additionally, the provider can infer the model dependency within the dbt project and will set the Airflow task dependencies accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The `DbtTaskGroup` function of the Astronomer dbt provider package automatically scans the `dbt` folder for dbt projects and creates a task group (`transform_data` in this example) containing one Airflow task for every dbt command run on every model in the project. Additionally, the provider can infer the model dependency within the dbt project and will set the Airflow task dependencies accordingly.
```
I'm a little confused by "run on every model in the project" part of the middle sentence. Otherwise this extra context looks great and is what I was envisioning :)
